ABSTRACT:
In this project, our primary objective is to detect early signs of breast cancer by analyzing a breast cancer dataset encompassing various collected characteristics of breast
cancer. We will employ three different machine leaning techniques: the KNN prediction model, logistic regression model, and decision tree model. Each machine learning technique
will be evaluated based on predefined metrics of success in order to determine the most suitable technique for the task.  The four predefined metrics will be sensitivity, 
specificity, accuracy, and precision.


INTRODUCTION:
Breast cancer has always been a growing concern for women in the United States and has continue to impact many woman over the age of 30. Breast cancer is the mutation of 
cells in the breast, causing cells  to grow into large tumors that can travel and cause other tumors in areas such as the arm pit. Even though the survivalability of woman with
breast cancer has increased, an earlier detection of breast cancer would only increase chance of survival.

Cell size and clump thickness are two important features that can provide insights into the nature of breast cancer cells. Generally, larger cell sizes and increased clump 
thickness are associated with malignant or cancerous cells, while smaller cell sizes and lower clump thickness are indicative of benign or non-cancerous cells. 

By analyzing the relationship between cell size and clump thickness in breast cancer data, we can observe patterns and correlations that help in identifying the nature of the 
cells. For example, if we observe a combination of larger cell sizes and higher clump thickness values in a sample, it suggests a higher likelihood of malignant cells. On 
the other hand, smaller cell sizes and lower clump thickness values indicate a higher probability of benign cells.

Machine learning algorithms can leverage these features to learn and classify breast cancer cells into malignant or benign categories. By training a model on a labeled dataset 
that includes cell size and clump thickness information, the model can make predictions on new, unseen data and provide valuable insights into the nature of the breast cancer 
cells under consideration.


DATA:
To ensure replicability and facilitate further research, the dataset that will be used in this project will also be included in the files section of this project. By providing 
access to the dataset, other researchers and practitioners will be able to replicate our experiments, verify our findings, and potentially build upon our work in the field of 
breast cancer detection.

The dataset encompasses 700 records and each record comprising of 11 fields of information. This comprehensive dataset provides significant amount of data to analyze and 
extract insight from, faciliating the exploration and development of models specifically related to breast cancer. 


DEFINITIONS:
KNN prediction model - classification method used to classify an object by their similarity to its nearest combination of variables. This method is often used when a 
classification of an object can not be easily determined by itself. 

Logistics regression model - statistical modeling technique using function of weighted independent variables to predict possiblility of dependent variables. We will use 
logistic regression model to predict the nature of the cancer cells with the assumption that malignant cancer cells score greater than 0.7.

Decision Tree - a supervised model used to classify an object based on sequences of decisions made using nodes and branches. Classification of an object is determined by the 
result of the leaf nodes or the last decision made. 


RESULTS:
KNN prediction model - The sensitivity of this model is 0.8889. This model will correctly identify a malignant class cell 88.89% of the time of all patients with malignant 
class cancers. In other words, about 12 in 100 patients who have malignant cancer will be incorrectly notified that they have a benign class cancer. 12% of patients would 
expect to be given a incorrect report using this model. This number should be taken seriously because this rate determines if a patient will be able to react in a timely manner
to their results. Patient who has malignant class cancer needs to be notified on time and as soon as possible. 

The specificity of this model is 0.9515. This means that this model will correctly identify a benign class cancer 95.15% of the times given that patients actually cell is a 
benign class cancer. However, even though this number is high, in terms of importance, specificity is not as important as sensitivity; it is not as crucial to notify cancer 
patient that their cancer class is not life threatening than it is to correctly notify a cancer patient that their cancer is life threatening.

Moving on, the accuracy of this model is 0.9325. This means that this model correctly identifies the correct class of cancer 93.25% of the time for all cancer patients. This 
number is high and represent that out of 100 patients, the model will only make 7 bad predictions. This rate represents a realistic prediction of the reliability of the model 
because we do not know if the class of cancer cell is benign or malignant beforehand in a real case.

Last but not least, the precision of this model is 0.8889. This model is correct 88.89% of the time in identifying malignant cancer cells given that the cancer cell is 
malignant. In other words, 12 in 100 predicted malignant cells is wrongly predicted. This number is important because we need to know how reliable is the model's prediction 
when it states that patients have a malignant class cancer. Higher rate for precision means better allocation of resources to the hospitals and to the patients to treat 
malignant cancers. 


Logistics Regression Model - The sensitivity of the logistics model is .9104. This model has a higher sensitivity that the KNN prediction model. The logistics model has a 
higher rate of accuracy predicting the class given that the actual class is malignant. This model would be more reliable to inform malignant cancer patients of their class 
than the KNN prediction model.

The specificity of the logistics model is .9353. The logistics model has a lower specificity than the KNN model. The logistics model predicts at a less accurately the class 
given that the actual class is benign than the KNN prediction model. It is better to use the KNN model instead of the logistics model if we know that the patient's  has benign 
cancer.  

Moving on, the logistics model has a accuracy of .9283. The logisitics model has an accuracy slightly lower than that of the KNN model. In other words, without knowing the 
class of patients, the logistic model would yield a slightly lower rate of correctly predicting than the KNN model. The logisitcs model perform better in a real case scenario.

Finally, the precision of the model is .8472. The logistic model has a precision 4% less than the KNN prediction model. This means that for every 100 cancer patients, the 
logistics model will incorrectly give the wrong report to 16 patients, 4 more than that of the KNN model.


Decision Tree - The sensitivity for the decision tree matrix is .9167. This means that only 9 in 100 patient will recieve the wrong report given that the class is malignant. 
This is the highest sensitivity rating of the three models and this would be the best model to use if the class is malignant.

The specificity of the decision tree model is .9394. This rate does not vary much than the specificity for the logistic regression. However, specificity is not as important in 
our analysis in this case. This rate only shows that the model can correctly predict the class given patient's class is benign. 

Moving on, the accuracy of the decision tree model is .9325. The accuracy of this model is the same as the other 2 model, varying only by less than 1%. This means that in terms 
of predicting the overall class, all these models predict equally as well as one another, whether the underlying class is benign or malignant.  

Last but not least, the precision of the decision tree model is .8684. This rate is higher than the logistic regression model but lower than the KNN prediction model. We can 
trust the decision tree's model more than that of the logistic model but less than that of the KNN prediction model when it comes to overall prediction of malignant cancer 
cells. 



CONCLUSION
#### Is there one method that is best than the others, and why?
Yes, there is one method that is best than the others in this case. Since we are dealing with two types of cancers, one where cancer cells are active and one where cancer cells are dormant, we must use the method that would help us correctly identify the class if the patient has a malignant cancer cell at the highest rate possible. In this case, the decision tree would be the correct model because the sensitivity of the model is the highest. We would reduce our risk that patients allow malignant cancer cells to continue to develop and increase the rate of patients reacting to cancer cells with proper treatments. 
```{r}
sensitivity(confusionMatrix)
sensitivity(logConfusionMatrix)
sensitivity(treeConfusionMatrix)
```








